#+HTML_HEAD: <style>body{max-width:42em}img{max-width:100%}.figure-number{display:none}</style>

#+TITLE: SAN: Buckyball Summer Camp at PACEE Lab

* Introduction

SAN is an experiment about the future of architecture.  It is
comprised of a system for building structures that /interact/ with the
environment.  Eventually structures will be able to /adapt/ to the
environment.  This solves the housing problem: Architecture moves to
where it is needed.

For the summer camp, we will work with a life-size version of the
/desktop system,/ see below.

/This document is a proposal and thereby subject to change./


* Desktop system

Specs:

- Node diameter: 50 mm

- Edge length: 100 mm

- Power source: 2 × CR2032 coin cells per node

- Types of connectors: BNC

- Node material: PLA

- Edge material: aluminum

- Microcontroller: 1 ATMega328p 16Mhz per node (Arduino compatible)

- Computer interface: web app written in JavaScript / Node.js / WebGl
  / Web Audio / genetic algorithm

- Low level communication protocol: MultiTrans

#+CAPTION: Complete set
[[./images/2018-10-11+02_complete_set.jpg]]

#+CAPTION: Dodecahedron built by two little girls at the end of Maker Faire Rome.  Notice the visualization in the background: The structure understands how it is assembled.
[[./images/2018-10-14+02_Maker-Faire-Rome-2018.jpg]]

#+CAPTION: Web app
[[./images/2019-01-10+01_screenshot.png]]


* Live-size system

Specs: (under development, subject to change)

- Node diameter: 200 mm

- Edge length: 400 mm

- Types of connectors: quick-connect

- Node material: PLA

- Edge material: PVC

- Power source: 4 × AAA battery per node

Other specs match those of the desktop system.

#+CAPTION: Prototype made out of metal (half a meter arm length)
[[./images/2019-05-06+08_prototype.jpg]]


* Past events

- Maker Faire Berlin 2018

- Maker Faire Rome 2018, with talk about genetic algorithms

- Maker to Market Bootcamp Bilbao 2018 (one out of six projects from
  EU countries), plus Maker Faire Bilbao

- Sónar Hong Kong music festival 2019: soldering workshop about an
  architectural structure that makes sound, targeted at professional
  musicians and architects

#+CAPTION: Instructions for Sónar (desktop version)
[[./images/2019-04-13+01_instructions.jpg]]


* Buckyball Summer Camp (three to five days in total)

One summer camp day is six hours long.

** Fabrication of the elements (two to three days)

Each participant fabricates one node and two connectors.

- Nodes:

  + 3D print shells

  + solder PCBs that go inside of the nodes

  + assemble nodes (glue, screws)

  + program PCBs

- Edges:

  + cut pipes to correct length (pipe cutter)

  + solder cables to connectors

  + assemble (glue, screws)

We will learn:

- How to operate a 3D printer

- How to solder a PCB

- How to work with hand tools for construction

- What goes into an electro mechanical product


** Construction (one to two days)

Participants join their nodes and connectors, for a collaborative
experience.

- Build structures

- Test structures

- Investigate structures using the web app

- Investigate how the nodes communicate

- Theory of tetrahedral symmetry in nature (diamond structure, SP3
  hybridization)

- Theory of the buckyball (requires 60 nodes, so unlikely we will
  be able to build one)

We will learn:

- Spatial thinking: real structure vs. structure on screen

- Geometry in nature and architecture

- The math of 3D space

- What is a communication protocol

- What is an adjacency matrix


** Music (optional, about half a day)

Each node functions as a module in a modular synthesizer.  We create
experimental music.

- Introduction to modular synthesis

- Think about structures in terms of the sound they represent

- Connect with a phone app to your node, and change the properties of
  the associated audio module

We will learn:

- Thinking outside of the box

- Basics of how a modular synthesizer works


** Conclusion (about half a day)

Together we will think about the future of architecture: /How could structures look that adapt to the environment and to the needs of the people?/

We will learn:

- How to brainstorm

- The role of architecture in the context of society

At the end, each participant takes home the node and the edges he
built.  This encourages participants to connect with others after the
workshop.


* Target audience

Children ages twelve and up.  Prior knowledge is not required, but it
is of course helpful.


* Tools

- 3D printers (one per participant would be ideal)

- soldering irons

- various hand tools, such as screw drivers and pipe cutters


* Material

- Filament for 3D printing

- Electronic parts

- PCBs

- Quick-connect connectors

- Mechanical parts


* Preparation

- Order materials

- Design PCBs (based on current small design)

- Order PCBs


* Tutor

Felix is a programmer and artist from Berlin.  His academic background
is architecture and physics (Universities of Hannover and Konstanz,
Germany, 1997–2004).  Felix investigates structures that bridge the
real and the virtual.  With a partner he runs a small art production
company, the Rieger & Klee GbR.  At the art-science gallery Spektrum,
Felix organizes MetaMatter, “a laboratory of research and practice
focused on the transformations of matter.”
